We're now going
to talk about how
to handle runtime exceptions.
And we'll see runtime
exception handling is basically
a variant of a
completion stage method,
but they're special
enough in terms
of their purpose, we kind of
talk about them separately.
Exception handling for
asynchronous computations
is more complex normally
than exception handling
for synchronous computations.
So for the conventional
synchronous exception handling
model, if an exception
occurs somewhere
in a call chain series--
a synchronous call
chain series--
a synchronous, not
asynchronous call chain,
but a synchronous
call chain series--
then the exception
that's thrown will just
propagate up the stack.
So if we're down at some level
and a bunch of method calls
were method 1 calls method 2,
calls method 3, calls method 4,
and method 4 throws
an exception,
like an IO exception, that
will then propagate up the call
stack until we finally
find a handler that knows
how to handle that exception.
And of course, if we
don't find a handler,
it'll fall off the
top of the stack,
and then the program
will probably blow up.
Or maybe if you've registered
an un-call exception handler,
it'll catch it and save the day.
But the point is that
things go up and down
the synchronous call stack,
where things are finally
caught and handled.
However, completable futures
that run asynchronously
don't conform to this
conventional call stack model,
because things are
going to be running
in the background and the thread
at which they were started--
like, where we call supply
is sync here, for example--
it's not going to be
typically where the call is
going to be handled.
So completion stage
methods can run
in a whole pile of
different worker threads,
especially if you use the
async variant of these things.
Then, it almost certainly will
run in a different thread.
So we have to find some way of
being able to handle exceptions
that occur asynchronously,
but do it in a way that
doesn't drive us insane.
And that's why we have
these exception handling
completion stage methods.
And they're able to handle
runtime exceptions that
occur asynchronously,
but we catch them
in a way that makes them
look more civilized and more
controlled.
As you can see,
there's several methods
that I would put into this
category of exception handling
or exception-related methods.
There's the when complete,
handle, and exceptionally
methods.
And in earlier
versions of Java, there
was an async variant for
when complete and handled.
With later versions of
Java, namely, Java 12--
which was released
relatively recently
to the making of this video, by
the time you watch this video,
there could be later
versions of Java, of course--
they added an async version
for exceptionally as well.
And you'll see, as we
talk about these methods,
they all do somewhat
different things.
So let's take a look
at an example that
will help make it
clear how to use
these different exception
handling completion stage
methods.
This particular example is
going to asynchronously create
a big fraction passing in 100 as
the numerator and some variable
as the denominator.
And if this denominator is
zero, then obviously, we're
going to get an exception.
Because if you
create a big fraction
with a denominator of zero,
then that's an erroneous number.
Now if you don't
handle an exception,
the program will be terminated.
So we don't want to
have that happen.
So let's take a look at a
couple of different ways
to deal with this.
The first way to
deal with this would
be to use that handle method.
And the handle
completion stage method
will handle the outcome
of the previous stage.
And it's always
called regardless of
whether an exception
is thrown or not.
And the reason
it's always called
is it's actually passed
a pair of values.
One is the value if things
completed non-exceptionally,
or successfully,
and the other is
the exception that occurs
if an exception is thrown.
So let's say, for
sake of argument,
that an exception was thrown.
Well, we're going to handle that
exception by simply converting
whatever went wrong
to the value zero,
and swallow the exception.
Conversely, the normal path,
when fraction was not null,
we just take the
fraction and multiply it
by some other number.
Handle must return a value and
then can thus change the return
value, as we show here.
And this will also
swallow the exception.
When we're all done,
no matter what,
we go ahead and print the
result, which would either
be the result of multiplying the
fraction by a reduced fraction,
or zero, depending on whether
an exception occurred.
Here's another way
to handle this.
This uses the
exceptionally method.
And this one is a bit more like
traditional exception handling,
except it works asynchronously.
Once again, we create
ourselves a big fraction
that might have a
denominator of zero,
so it might or might
not throw an exception.
We then have the
thenApply method.
In this case, if all
goes well, then we're
going to go ahead and multiply
the fraction by the reduced
fraction constant.
Everything's fine.
And if that happens,
we're going to skip
the exceptionally method.
Conversely, if an
exception is thrown,
the thenApply method
will be skipped.
And if an exception
occurs, control
will transfer automatically
to the exceptionally method.
And that will handle the case
where the denominator was zero,
and therefore, an
exception was thrown.
For this particular
example, maybe a little bit
sleazy here, but we're going
to swallow the exception
by converting the exception
to the zero result,
just to show you
something to do--
not necessarily the best thing
to do to swallow exceptions,
by the way.
And then we turn around
and print the results out,
which will either be zero
if an exception occurred,
or the result of multiplying
the big fraction.
There is yet another way
we can deal with things,
and that's to use whenComplete.
The whenComplete
method is called
like handle under both normal
and exceptional conditions.
As before, it passes in
two parameters, fraction
and the exception.
And these values are
mutually exclusive.
Either one of them is
null, or one of them is--
either one of them is null, the
other is null, and one of them
is non-null, and other is
non-null, but not both.
If the fraction is not
null, it means it succeeded.
So you go ahead and
print out the result.
If the exception
occurred, we print out
the message of the exception.
Why did it fail?
Was it because we
divided by zero?
And so on.
whenComplete is somewhat
like Java streams peak.
It has a side effect.
It doesn't change the
return value at all,
and most importantly--
and somewhat
non-intuitively-- it doesn't
actually swallow the exception.
So that exception will
keep propagating up.
So you'll have to
figure out how to catch
the exception through
some other means,
probably by using exceptionally.
But the key thing
about whenComplete
is it always gets called.